README.md, before:

# doorkeeper

A simple and unobtrusive token management service.

The _doorkeeper_ service uses strictly tokens in [JSON Web Token](https://jwt.io/) format.

This is a [RESTful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer) web service, written in javascript and built on top of [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)

As token database backend an internal _in memory store_ (development) can be used or alternatively a [redis](https://redis.io/) store (production).

This micro service is intended as a starting point for the development of distributed web apps/services that need token-based verification. the architecture is designed in such a way that further required code logic can be easily inserted in many places.

Another design decision in the architecture of the service is the _principle of minimalism_. as little as possible is written into the database and if e.g. a token expires, it is also deleted from the database. this also applies to the logging (there are really only a few meaningful outputs in the production log) and no detailed error messages are sent to the client (this also ultimately benefits security).

## Table of Contents

- [doorkeeper](#doorkeeper)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Login via Password](#login-via-password)
    - [Create Session Token](#create-session-token)
  - [Service Endpoints](#service-endpoints)
    - [Routes Overview](#routes-overview)
    - [Create Login Token _aka_ Login via Password](#create-login-token-aka-login-via-password)
    - [Create Session Token](#create-session-token-1)
    - [Verify Token](#verify-token)
    - [Destroy All Tokens](#destroy-all-tokens)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [Setup](#setup)
    - [Testing](#testing)
    - [Generate Diagrams](#generate-diagrams)
    - [Run a local server](#run-a-local-server)
    - [Build docker image](#build-docker-image)
  - [Configuration](#configuration)


## How it works

The _doorkeeper_ service knows two different types of tokens: The **login token** can be generated using a valid _login id_ and a _password_. A login token can then be used to generate a **session token**. Such a session token can be used to authenticate api calls to your other web app/services.

Both tokens have a limited lifetime (expiration). While the session token is usually only valid for a short time (1 hour) the login token is different, it could be valid for much longer (e.g. 6 months), but expires after 7 days if the login token is not used to generate session tokens.

> NOTE: all timeouts mentioned are of course customizable

In order to generate a login token, the _doorkeeper_ service must rely on a (possibly external) user provider and on the store (a redis database).

When generating a session token based on a login token, the content of the login token is trusted and it is therefore no longer necessary to ask the (possibly) external user provider for it, but the store is still accessed (of course only login tokens issued by the service itself are trusted)

> NOTE: The current implementation of the doorkeeper service uses a simple `users.json` file as user database (at this point the developer is encouraged to add more enhanced user providers and extended login-is-valid verifications :wink:)

The goal of the whole procedure is to give the client a valid session token that can be used to access other api calls from your actual web app services.
The session token contains the `uid`, `displayName` and `roles`, these properties can be used by other services for authorization.

To decode and verify the content of the session token, the doorkeeper service is no longer necessary, this is possible from any other code, only the _public key_ of the _doorkeeper_ is needed for verification.

> NOTE: all tokens generated by the doorkeeper are cryptographically signed. this can be verified using the _public key_. without the (secret) _private key_, it should also not be possible for anyone else to generate valid tokens.

### Login via Password

![Login via password](./docs/login-via-password.mmd.svg)

### Create Session Token

![Create session token](./docs/create-session-token.mmd.svg)


## Service Endpoints

### Routes Overview

| route | method | description |
|-------|--------|-------------|
| `/token/login` | POST | create **login** token |
| `/token/session` | POST | create **session** token |
| `/token` | GET | verify token and return payload as json |
| `/tokens` | DELETE | invalidate all login tokens |

---

### Create Login Token _aka_ Login via Password

```
POST /token/login
```

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `login` | string | body | login id |
| `password` | string | body | login secret |

Create a new login token. You will need to send the `login` and `password` parameters.
The service will accept the parameters only as _form_ or _json_ encoded body data.

Returns a _signed_ [jwt token](https://jwt.io/).

---

### Create Session Token

```
POST /token/session
```

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | login token |

Create a new session token.

You need to pass your login token as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer XYZ123`.

Returns a _signed_ [jwt token](https://jwt.io/).

---

### Verify Token

```
GET /token
```

Verify and return the token payload as json.

You need to pass your token (this can be either a login or a session token) as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer XYZ123`.

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | token |

Returns the token payload data as *json* object.
Returns with an error (`400 Bad Request`) if the token can not be verified.

---

### Destroy All Tokens

```
DELETE /tokens
```

Invalidate all login tokens.
So all clients have to log in again when they want to create new session tokens.

> NOTE: the existing session tokens will remain in place until they expire

You need to pass your session token as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer xyz123`.

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | jwt token |

> :warning: SECURITY NOTE: for this api call the `admin` role must be present in the token data props under the `roles` key!

---

## Development

### Setup

As a prerequisite, you need a **node v16+** and a current **docker** environment installed.

```sh
$ npm install
```

### Testing

Run `npm test` for running all tests from [test/*](test) against the local in-memory database.

Using `npm run test:redis:run` will use *docker-compose* to run all tests against a dockerized redis instance.

Or just use `npm run test:all` to run all tests against both environments (intended for ci).

For development `npm run test:watch` is meant, which _only_ test against the in-memory database, but restarts the tests every time the sources have changed. very useful for development 😉

> :point_right: NOTE: at the moment we use _mocha_ as test runner and not _jest_ because _jest_ support for native es6 imports is still experimental AND _jest_ runs incredibly slow in a docker context 😢


### Generate Diagrams

> :coffee: TODO write docs


### Run a local server

In order to run a local server, you need to start a redis instance:

```sh
$ npm run dev:redis:up
```

After that, you can start a local server with:

```sh
$ npm start
# .. or use:
$ npm run watch
```

This will start a server listening on http://localhost:6100 and restart the application when a source file changed.

> for the very lazy `npm run dev` is meant ... this starts both a redis instance and then immediately the server in watch mode


### Build docker image

To create a release version and build the docker image, simply run:

```sh
$ npm run docker:build
```

Start the docker container with `npm run docker:run` (or use `docker:start` which starts the doorkeeper service in the background) or run an interactive shell session via `npm run docker:run:shell`


## Configuration

> :coffee: TODO write docs


have fun 🚀

Commit message:

improve diagrams
- add user provider to login via password diagram
- add how to generate diagrams section to README

README.md, after:

# doorkeeper

A simple and unobtrusive token management service.

The _doorkeeper_ service uses strictly tokens in [JSON Web Token](https://jwt.io/) format.

This is a [RESTful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer) web service, written in javascript and built on top of [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)

As token database backend an internal _in memory store_ (development) can be used or alternatively a [redis](https://redis.io/) store (production).

This micro service is intended as a starting point for the development of distributed web apps/services that need token-based verification. the architecture is designed in such a way that further required code logic can be easily inserted in many places.

Another design decision in the architecture of the service is the _principle of minimalism_. as little as possible is written into the database and if e.g. a token expires, it is also deleted from the database. this also applies to the logging (there are really only a few meaningful outputs in the production log) and no detailed error messages are sent to the client (this also ultimately benefits security).

## Table of Contents

- [doorkeeper](#doorkeeper)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Login via Password](#login-via-password)
    - [Create Session Token](#create-session-token)
  - [Service Endpoints](#service-endpoints)
    - [Routes Overview](#routes-overview)
    - [Create Login Token _aka_ Login via Password](#create-login-token-aka-login-via-password)
    - [Create Session Token](#create-session-token-1)
    - [Verify Token](#verify-token)
    - [Destroy All Tokens](#destroy-all-tokens)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [Setup](#setup)
    - [Testing](#testing)
    - [Generate Diagrams](#generate-diagrams)
    - [Run a local server](#run-a-local-server)
    - [Build docker image](#build-docker-image)
  - [Configuration](#configuration)


## How it works

The _doorkeeper_ service knows two different types of tokens: The **login token** can be generated using a valid _login id_ and a _password_. A login token can then be used to generate a **session token**. Such a session token can be used to authenticate api calls to your other web app/services.

Both tokens have a limited lifetime (expiration). While the session token is usually only valid for a short time (1 hour) the login token is different, it could be valid for much longer (e.g. 6 months), but expires after 7 days if the login token is not used to generate session tokens.

> NOTE: all timeouts mentioned are of course customizable

In order to generate a login token, the _doorkeeper_ service must rely on a (possibly external) user provider and on the store (a redis database).

When generating a session token based on a login token, the content of the login token is trusted and it is therefore no longer necessary to ask the (possibly) external user provider for it, but the store is still accessed (of course only login tokens issued by the service itself are trusted)

> NOTE: The current implementation of the doorkeeper service uses a simple `users.json` file as user provider (at this point the developer is encouraged to add more enhanced user providers and extended login-is-valid verifications :wink:)

The goal of the whole procedure is to give the client a valid session token that can be used to access other api calls from your actual web app services.
The session token contains the `uid`, `displayName` and `roles`, these properties can be used by other services for authorization.

To decode and verify the content of the session token, the doorkeeper service is no longer necessary, this is possible from any other code, only the _public key_ of the _doorkeeper_ is needed for verification.

> NOTE: all tokens generated by the doorkeeper are cryptographically signed. this can be verified using the _public key_. without the (secret) _private key_, it should also not be possible for anyone else to generate valid tokens.

### Login via Password

![Login via password](./docs/login-via-password.mmd.svg)

### Create Session Token

![Create session token](./docs/create-session-token.mmd.svg)


## Service Endpoints

### Routes Overview

| route | method | description |
|-------|--------|-------------|
| `/token/login` | POST | create **login** token |
| `/token/session` | POST | create **session** token |
| `/token` | GET | verify token and return payload as json |
| `/tokens` | DELETE | invalidate all login tokens |

---

### Create Login Token _aka_ Login via Password

```
POST /token/login
```

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `login` | string | body | login id |
| `password` | string | body | login secret |

Create a new login token. You will need to send the `login` and `password` parameters.
The service will accept the parameters only as _form_ or _json_ encoded body data.

Returns a _signed_ [jwt token](https://jwt.io/).

---

### Create Session Token

```
POST /token/session
```

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | login token |

Create a new session token.

You need to pass your login token as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer XYZ123`.

Returns a _signed_ [jwt token](https://jwt.io/).

---

### Verify Token

```
GET /token
```

Verify and return the token payload as json.

You need to pass your token (this can be either a login or a session token) as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer XYZ123`.

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | token |

Returns the token payload data as *json* object.
Returns with an error (`400 Bad Request`) if the token can not be verified.

---

### Destroy All Tokens

```
DELETE /tokens
```

Invalidate all login tokens.
So all clients have to log in again when they want to create new session tokens.

> NOTE: the existing session tokens will remain in place until they expire

You need to pass your session token as header parameter: `Authorization: Bearer xyz123`.

| parameter | type | in | description |
|-----------|------|----|-------------|
| `Authorization` | string | header | jwt token |

> :warning: SECURITY NOTE: for this api call the `admin` role must be present in the token data props under the `roles` key!

---

## Development

### Setup

As a prerequisite, you need a **node v16+** and a current **docker** environment installed.

```sh
$ npm install
```

### Testing

Run `npm test` for running all tests from [test/*](test) against the local in-memory database.

Using `npm run test:redis:run` will use *docker-compose* to run all tests against a dockerized redis instance.

Or just use `npm run test:all` to run all tests against both environments (intended for ci).

For development `npm run test:watch` is meant, which _only_ test against the in-memory database, but restarts the tests every time the sources have changed. very useful for development 😉

> :point_right: NOTE: at the moment we use _mocha_ as test runner and not _jest_ because _jest_ support for native es6 imports is still experimental AND _jest_ runs incredibly slow in a docker context 😢


### Generate Diagrams

The diagrams (in this README) are generated using [Mermaid.js](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/).
To use _mermaid_, the docker image must first be loaded once: `npm run pull-mermaid`.

The diagrams (which can be found in [./docs/](./docs)) are then generated with `npm run generate-diagrams`


### Run a local server

In order to run a local server, you need to start a redis instance:

```sh
$ npm run dev:redis:up
```

After that, you can start a local server with:

```sh
$ npm start
# .. or use:
$ npm run watch
```

This will start a server listening on http://localhost:6100 and restart the application when a source file changed.

> for the very lazy `npm run dev` is meant ... this starts both a redis instance and then immediately the server in watch mode


### Build docker image

To create a release version and build the docker image, simply run:

```sh
$ npm run docker:build
```

Start the docker container with `npm run docker:run` (or use `docker:start` which starts the doorkeeper service in the background) or run an interactive shell session via `npm run docker:run:shell`


## Configuration

> :coffee: TODO write docs


have fun 🚀
